##  airdaemon manual page   -*- mode: text; fill-column: 78 -*-
##

=pod

=begin html

<!--
    Copyright (C) 2006-2025 Carnegie Mellon University
    See license information in LICENSE.txt.
-->
<!--
    @DISTRIBUTION_STATEMENT_BEGIN@
    YAF 2.16

    Copyright 2024 Carnegie Mellon University.

    NO WARRANTY. THIS CARNEGIE MELLON UNIVERSITY AND SOFTWARE ENGINEERING
    INSTITUTE MATERIAL IS FURNISHED ON AN "AS-IS" BASIS. CARNEGIE MELLON
    UNIVERSITY MAKES NO WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EITHER EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED,
    AS TO ANY MATTER INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, WARRANTY OF FITNESS FOR
    PURPOSE OR MERCHANTABILITY, EXCLUSIVITY, OR RESULTS OBTAINED FROM USE OF
    THE MATERIAL. CARNEGIE MELLON UNIVERSITY DOES NOT MAKE ANY WARRANTY OF
    ANY KIND WITH RESPECT TO FREEDOM FROM PATENT, TRADEMARK, OR COPYRIGHT
    INFRINGEMENT.

    Licensed under a GNU GPL 2.0-style license, please see LICENSE.txt or
    contact permission@sei.cmu.edu for full terms.

    [DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT A] This material has been approved for public
    release and unlimited distribution.  Please see Copyright notice for
    non-US Government use and distribution.

    This Software includes and/or makes use of Third-Party Software each
    subject to its own license.

    DM24-1063
    @DISTRIBUTION_STATEMENT_END@
-->

=end html

=head1 NAME

B<airdaemon> - Run a program as a daemon process, restarting it if it dies

=head1 SYNOPSIS

    airdaemon   [--retry RETRY_DELAY] [--retry-max RETRY_MAX_DELAY]
                [--pidfile PID_FILE] [--airdaemon-pidfile PID_FILE]
                [--log LOG_SPECIFIER] [--loglevel LOG_LEVEL]
                [--verbose] [--version] [--no-daemon]
                -- PROGRAM [PROGRAM_ARGS]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<airdaemon> invokes a child process and ensures that it is restarted if it
encounters any errors.  The delay between child exit and restart can be
chosen, and can either be constant or exponentially increasing up to a
specified maximum.

Use of two dashes (--) after all airdaemon command-line switches allows
PROGRAM_ARGS to be interpreted by the PROGRAM rather than B<airdaemon> itself.
While they are not strictly required if you do not need to pass arguments to
PROGRAM, they should be used for consistency.

=head1 OPTIONS

=head2 Daemon Options

=over 4

=item B<--retry>=I<RETRY_DELAY>

Wait RETRY_DELAY seconds after the child process exits abnormally until trying
to restart the child process.  See also B<--retry-max>

=item B<--retry-max>=I<RETRY_MAX_DELAY>

This parameter, combined with the B<--retry> parameter, facilitates truncated
binary exponential backoff of the retry logic.  The first retry attempt will
be delayed by the value of the B<--retry> parameter.  If the child process
exits abnormally within this time period, the delay is doubled.  Once the
child process survives longer than the value of the B<--retry> parameter, the
retry delay is reset to that value.

For example, assume B<--retry>=30 and B<--retry-max>=240.  The first time the
child process exits abnormally, B<airdaemon> will wait 30 seconds before
invoking the child process again.  If it exits abnormally again within 30
seconds, B<airdaemon> will wait 60 seconds and try again.  If the process
dies again within 30 seconds, the delay doubles again to 120.  The process
continues until the delay hits the maximum of 240.  Once the child process
survives for 30 seconds, the delay will be reset to the original retry delay
of 30.

=item B<--pidfile>=I<PID_FILE>

Write the process identifier of the child process to I<PID_FILE>.
Each time the child process is restarted, the process identifier in this file
is updated. This option exists to facilitate the termination of the child
process by shutdown scripts. Note that if the child process terminates
normally during shutdown, airdaemon will terminate normally as well, so it
is usually sufficient just to kill the pid in this file at shutdown.

=item B<--airdaemon-pidfile>=I<PID_FILE>

Write the process identifier of the airdaemon process to I<PID_FILE>.
This option exists to facilitate the termination of the forked
airdaemon process by shutdown scripts.

=item B<--no-daemon>

Do not actually daemonize.  Mainly useful for testing/debugging.

=back

=head2 Logging Options

These options are used to specify how log messages are routed.  airdaemon can
log to standard error, regular files, or the UNIX syslog facility.

=over 4

=item B<--log> I<LOG_SPECIFIER>

Specifies destination for log messages. I<LOG_SPECIFIER> can be a syslog(3)
facility name, the special value B<stderr> for standard error, or the
I<absolute> path to a file for file logging. Standard error logging is only
available in B<--daemon> mode if B<--foreground> is present. The default log
specifier is B<stderr> if available, B<user> otherwise.

=item B<--loglevel> I<LOG_LEVEL>

Specify minimum level for logged messages. In increasing levels of verbosity,
the supported log levels are B<quiet>, B<error>, B<critical>, B<warning>,
B<message>, B<info>, and B<debug>. The default logging level is B<warning>.

=item B<--verbose>

Equivalent to B<--loglevel debug>.

=item B<--version>

If present, print version and copyright information to standard error and exit.

=back

=head1 EXAMPLES

The following will ping www.cert.org every 15 seconds until ping returns
sucess:

    airdaemon --retry 15 -- ping -c 1 www.cert.org

The same as above, except the delay will double until reaching a maximum of 15
minutes:

    airdaemon --retry 15 --retry-max 900 -- ping -c 1 www.cert.org


=head1 BUGS

Known issues are listed in the B<README> file in the Airframe source
distribution. Note that airdaemon should be considered alpha-quality software;
not every concievable input and aggregation is exhaustively tested at each
release, and specific features may be completely untested. Please be mindful
of this before deploying airdaemon in production environments. Bug reports and
feature requests may be sent via email to E<lt>netsa-help@cert.orgE<gt>.

=head1 AUTHORS

Tony Cebzanov and  Brian Trammell for the
CERT Network Situational Awareness
Group, http://www.cert.org/netsa

=head1 SEE ALSO

filedaemon(1)

=cut
